[MUSIC]
We've seen a few arithmetic expressions so
far, like addition, subtraction, and
division.
Remember when we turned
Python into a calculator?
Well, Python can also compare values.
This lets us check whether something
is smaller than, equal to,
or bigger than something else.
This allows us to take the result
of our expressions and
use them to make decisions.
Check out these three examples.
In the first example 10 is greater than 1,
so the value true is printed as a result.
True is a value that belongs to
another data type called the Boolean.
Booleans represent one of two possible
states, either true or false.
Every time you compare things in
Python the result is a Boolean of
the appropriate value.
In the second example we can see
our very first equality operator,
which is formed by putting
two equal signs together.
We use this operator to test whether
two things are equal to each other.
In this example the string cat is
not equal to the string dog, so
the Boolean that's printed is false.
In our third example we're
doing the opposite comparison.
By pairing an exclamation mark and
an equal sign we're using the not
equals operator, which is the negated
form of the equality operator.
In this particular line of code the
operator checks that 1 isn't equal to 2.
We call out before that the plus operator
doesn't work between integers and strings.
What do you think will happen if we
try to compare an integer and string?
Let's find out by seeing if the number
1 is taller than the string 1.
Wha, wha, wha, we get a type error.
That's the same error we got before.
This happens because Python doesn't know
how to check if a number is smaller than
a string.
And what about the equality operator?
In this case the Interpreter has no
problem telling us that the integer 1 and
the string 1 aren't the same.
So what gives?
Basically although they may seem
similar to us because they both contain
the same number, it's clear to
the computer that one is a number and
the other is the string.
For the computer it's obvious that they
are completely different entities.
On top of the comparison and
equality operators,
Python also has a set
of logical operators.
These operators allow you to connect
multiple statements together and
perform more complex comparisons.
In Python the logical operators
are the words and, or, and
not, let's look at some examples.
To evaluate as true the and
operator would need both expressions
to be true at the same time here.
Here we're comparing strings,
and the bigger and
smaller operators refer
to alphabetical order.
Yellow comes after cyan, but
brown doesn't come after magenta.
So this means that the first statement
is true, but the second one isn't,
which makes the result of
the whole expression false.
If we use the or operator instead
the expression will be true if either of
the expressions are true, and false
only when both expressions are false.
Let's try it out.
25 is definitely not bigger than 50,
but 1 is different than 2.
So in the end the whole
expression is true.
Last up,
the not operator inverts the value of
the expression that's in front of it.
If the expression is true,
it becomes false.
If it's false, it becomes true.
Just like this.
Logical operators are important because
they help us write more complex
expressions.
We'll see this in action
in the next few videos.
If this is the first time you've come
across these operators it might seem like
there's a lot to remember.
But don't worry, you'll learn most of
them very quickly just by practicing.
And in the next reading we
have a cheat sheet that lists
all the operators available and
what each one does.
It's a handy resource you're sure to find
useful when writing your own scripts.